Dear Dr. Gorgens,

The Subject Editor has determined that your manuscript, "Resource availability and disturbance shape maximum tree height across the Amazon”, which you recently submitted to Global Change Biology, requires major revisions.  You are therefore encouraged to submit a revised version of your manuscript based on the comments of the referees and Subject Editor.

Upon resubmission, the revised manuscript will be reassessed by an Editor. At that time, manuscripts may be rejected without review, accepted or accepted with minor revisions.    Journal policy is not to allow a second round of major revisions.  If on receipt your revised ms is deemed by the Editors to still require major revisions, then it will be rejected.

With your revised manuscript, you must include a detailed response indicating how the manuscript has been changed in response to each of the referees’ or/and Editors’ criticisms. Please upload this document as a manuscript file with the file designation “Response to reviewer’s comments.”

We impose a deadline of 45 days for the return of revised manuscripts.  Manuscripts returned after the deadline may be regarded as new submissions, with a new receipt date, and may be subject to the full peer review process.  If you need more time to prepare your revision, please contact the Editorial Office before the submission deadline.

To submit your revised files, log into https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/gcb and enter your Author Center.  Click on "Click here to submit a Revision."  Your manuscript number will be appended to denote a revision.  Please DO NOT upload your revised manuscripts as a new submission.

If you would like help with English language editing, or other article preparation support, Wiley Editing Services offers expert help with English Language Editing, as well as translation, manuscript formatting, and figure formatting at www.wileyauthors.com/eeo/preparation. You can also check out our resources for Preparing Your Article for general guidance about writing and preparing your manuscript at www.wileyauthors.com/eeo/prepresources.

IMPORTANT:  Your original files are available to you when you upload your revised manuscript.  Please delete any redundant files before completing the submission.

Once again, thank you for submitting your manuscript to Global Change Biology.  We look forward to receiving your revision.

Sincerely,
Global Change Biology Editorial Office



Editor's Comments to Author:

Subject Editor: 1
Comments to Author :
Dear authors,

your manuscript was assessed by two referees. Both responded positively, but they also raised multiple issues that will need to be addressed. These all appear feasible, but will require some work.


Reviewer(s)' Comments to Author:

Reviewer: 1

Comments to the Author
Review of Gorgens et al. GCB

In this study, the authors provide novel evidence for the distribution of tall trees across Amazonia, based on an unprecedented airborne lidar coverage of the region, with close to 1000 lidar transects of 375 ha each. This is equivalent to 3400 km2 of coverage, or 0.06% of the full extent of Amazonia. Apart from a relatively brief report (Georgens et al. 2019), this is the first publication using this impressive dataset, and for this reason it will likely be highly cited. The finding that Amazonia has an uneven distribution of very tall trees is novel (even if consistent with previous results at much coarser resolution, Simard et al. 2011). The text is clear and concise. In this manuscript, the authors (1) compute the density of tall trees (i.e., trees > 50, 60, 70 or even 80 m tall), (2) predict this density using environmental variables using statistical modelling, (3) interpret the geographical distribution of tall trees across Amazonia.

Please find below a few comments for the authors' consideration in a revision, to increase the clarity of the text.

a/ around line 90, it would be useful to clarify what tree height metrics were derived. It seems that the authors were able to quantify the presence/absence of trees greater than a specified height per transect, but it would seem that they actually quantified the number of 1-m2 pixels exceeding the threshold height per transect. If the latter, it would be valuable to provide statistics of how many pixels are beyond 70 m (excluding non-tree maxima, as briefly alluded to line 91), and also discuss a possible link between number of spatial clusters of pixels and number of individual stems, which is the relevant ecological quantity. A relevant paper related to this discussion is Meyer et al. (2018).

b/ the results section could be made more quantitative. How many transects had trees > 70 m across Amazonia? What is the overall coverage of trees > 70 m across Amazonia (based on pixels above this height)? I appreciate that the authors do not wish to publish mean statistics for their dataset, as it may be part of a separate paper, but it would be great to plot the distribution of maximum tree height across the 906 landscapes. This is different from Figure 2, and it would be useful to compare raw and modelled results.

c/ The discussion of table 1 is exceedingly brief (lines 201-203) -- is there a natural way to select the most important variables? The authors choose to report all variable with an importance > 8% (n=4). Does it mean that precipitation seasonality can be safely ignored (importance 6.9%)?

d/ Figures could be improved. Figure 1 could show the location of all the transects, not only those where the presence of tall trees has been  detected. It is difficult to interpret the bioregions as they are depicted in shades of grey. One solution would be to label the bioregion name onto the map itself (e.g., on the bottom-right panel). Also, it would be good to draw the rest of the continent, to aid the non-specialist reader. The legend does not have to be replicated within each sub-panel.  Figure 2 would be much more impactful in colour. Here again, it would be important to map other features of South American geography (such as continental and country boundaries). The caption of Figure 3 is cryptic -- please explain more clearly what the lines represent. In short, lines 228-231 should belong in the caption of figure 3. Same comment as for Figure 3 applies to Figure 4. Same comment as for Figure 2 applies to Figure 5.

e/ Could the presence of tall trees detected in the 'pantepui' area North of Rio Negro and West of Rio Branco be due to the steep topography of this area? With 4 laser pulses per m2, it may be difficult to resolve ground location on hilly terrain, which could bias tree height retrieval. Actually, the same comment applies to the main identified region with tall Amazonian trees, around Rio Maicuru and Jarí. This region appears to be quite hilly relative to the rest of Amazonia. The paper should discuss this possible bias, but even If the authors are confident that terrain slopes do not contribute to inflating the occurrence of large trees, it would be also interesting to discuss whether rugged topography could offer the conditions for lower average wind speeds. This could be included near lines 327-335.

Trivia:
line 184: this study does not include a survival analysis, and it may be better to refer to the occurrence/presence of the tallest trees, not their 'survival'.
line 247: sentence 'The extraordinarily tall trees had a unique niche' is confusing. Why use the niche concept in this situation, as it is usually associated to individual species, why should this niche be 'unique'? Perhaps a better/simpler wording would be 'The extraordinarily tall trees were found in conditions characterised by a much smaller ...'

Citations
Meyer, V., Saatchi, S., Clark, D. B., Keller, M., Vincent, G., Ferraz, A., ... & Chave, J. (2018). Canopy area of large trees explains aboveground biomass variations across neotropical forest landscapes. Biogeosciences, 15, 3377-3390.
Simard, M., Pinto, N., Fisher, J. B., & Baccini, A. (2011). Mapping forest canopy height globally with spaceborne lidar. Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences, 116(G4).



Reviewer: 2

Comments to the Author
In this study, the authors aimed to evaluate which environmental variables, related to resource availability and disturbance, are associated with variation in maximum tree height, and to identify the environmental conditions related to the occurrence of giant trees (> 70m) across the Brazilian Amazon. There is little knowledge about the distribution of the tallest trees in the Amazon and what are the environmental conditions that allow the trees to reach their potential heights. I liked the ecological approach that the authors brought about the potential positive effects of resource availability, and negative effects of the intensity and frequency of exogenous disturbances. The high-resolution data from airborne LiDAR collected over the Brazilian Amazon allows a relevant ecological study addressing these issues on a regional scale.

Major comments
My main criticisms on the manuscript (listed below) are the clarity in the writing, and the interpreting and discussion of the results. I also have one concern about the sampling design that can be easily addressed.
1. The study had two main questions (related to drivers of maximum height and favorable environmental conditions for the occurrence of giant trees) that need to be clearly presented with the background rationale in the introduction. The motivation for using (the 18) different environmental variables also needs to be clear in the introduction (how these variables relate to the availability of resources and disturbances and how these two main factors affect maximum height and occurrence of giant trees).
2. The methods need a more detailed description of the analyses used. The reader needs to understand the general idea of the analyses (and why they were chosen). All environmental variables must have the spatial resolution presented and those involving historical series must bring the duration. In my view, secondary forests and degraded areas should be excluded from the study a priori. I do not see how the maximum height of these anthropic areas can contribute to answer the study's questions, which are related to mature forests properties and dynamics (without recent anthropic influence).
3. The results (and discussion) need to bring the perspective of combined environmental variables. What makes two regions with similar annual rainfall have different maximum heights? The final tree of the Random Forest Model (RFM) may help understanding these combinations of factors. I would also like to see a scatterplot with the relationship between predicted and observed values of the RFM.
4. The discussion needs to be restructured to bring first a summary of the main findings of the study and to focus on the discussion of the results in the light of the hypotheses.
5- The manuscript would also benefit from careful proofreading - there are numerous language errors (noticed even by a non-native English speaker) that need to be addressed.

Specific comments
Line 7: The author should make clear in the abstract the two questions addressed in the study.
Line 6: Why including secondary forests in the study? How they contribute to understand the factors influencing maximum tree height on mature forests?
Line 10: "occurrence" is more appropriate since the author did not present data of survivorship/mortality of trees. Instead of  "tree giant", "giant trees".
Line 18: composition of what? "species composition of the rainforest..".
Lines 24-26: Are studies about the seasonality of forest productivity (Huete et al and Morton et al) a good base of comparison to the study of drivers of maximum tree height? I suggest the authors build on previous work more directly related to tree or forest canopy height. How the present study is going to fill a gap in the literature of trees/forest height in Amazonia?
Lines 27-28: The authors could be more specific on what sort of environmental conditions beside climate they are referring as "other environmental conditions" limiting maximum tree height. Also, they should explain how climatic and these other factors can influence tree height.
Line 31: "local scale factors" seems more appropriate than "small-scale factors".
Line 36: "Forest giant trees" instead of "Forest giants".
Line 38-40: Please provide a work as reference for hydraulic resistance.

Methods
Lines 89-90: It would be helpful to have a figure as supporting information showing maximum height identification in a LiDAR transect.
Lines 167-169: Why use the Random Forest Model approach? Please include a brief explanation of this analysis and what are the advantages of using it for this study.
Lines 171-172: The authors extracted values from environmental layers to the coordinates of the tallest trees in each LiDAR transect. Did the authors use a simple extraction for all layers or did they try to represent some heterogeneity around the tallest tree location. Which were the criteria to make this decision for the different layers?
Line 187: Phillips et al. 2006 is missing in the list of references
Line 212: Table 1. I suggest including a column with the expected influence (positive or negative) of each variable on the maximum tree height. Also, inform the reader what is the spatial resolution of all variables used, what is the time resolution and the initial and final years of the time series used (when applicable). Include in the methods section, what is the depth of soil sampling for clay content.
Line 213: Indicate the parameter in the Random Forest that inform the relative importance of each variable in the Random Forest Model.

Results
Because the random forest model is a kind of decision tree (or a collection of decision trees), there should be a hierarchical importance of variables from top to lower nodes. I missed the explanation of this hierarchical combination of variables in the results. For instance, does the region with the higher maximum tree heights present a lower number of clear days, high clay content and elevation above sea level and intermediary annual precipitation? Maybe a graphical output of the final tree (as supporting information) may help to explain that. A panel with maps showing the spatial distribution of the most important variables, together with the map of maximum heights prediction (Fig. 2), may also be a good way to show the combination of factors leading to different maximum heights across Amazonia.
Lines 219-221: This seems a reverse logic in my opinion. Why use low values of FAPAR to exclude areas of degraded and anthropogenic regions (secondary forests?) instead of excluding these areas a priori? Secondary and degraded forests will present maximum heights lower than it would be potentially in mature and non-degraded forests.
Line 244: Figure 3. I suggest order the graphs according the importance of the variable to predict maximum tree height, as presented in Table 1.
Line 249: "driver of tall tree occurrence" instead of "...survival".
Lines 249-251: Why other variables showing higher probability values (up to ~0.5) in Figure 4 (e.g. Potential evap., Clear days, Days > 20mm) had lower relative contribution compared to elevation above sea level, which present maximum probability values of 0.25?
Line 258: Figure 4. What is the unit of the probabilities? I suggest order the plots according their relative importance in Maxent.

Discussion
menor numero de dias maior altura não tem correlacao com precipitação?
Lines 266-267: Remind the reader what is your definition of tall trees (> 70m?). Be more specific about what part of the southern Amazon has tall trees. Data on LiDAR occurrence (Fig. 1) or the prediction model (Fig. 2) show tall trees predominantly in the northeastern of Brazilian Amazon (and in the north of subdivision II). Also, Malhi et al 2006 did not show a coincident spatial pattern of basal area as their map show higher values of basal area in forests of the northwestern basin.
Line 268-269: Different from what is expected according this pattern the authors showed maximum heights > 60m in areas with dry season longer than four months, in region II.
Lines 273-286: The message of this paragraph is not clear. How all these components (wood density, soil properties, climate) relate with the hypotheses and explain the results?
Lines 276-277: ter Steege et al. (2006) Nature, 443: 444-447 present a map of the average wood density of trees which also supports this statement.
Line 294: The authors say "disturbance rates are far higher". Is it possible to provide a quantitative measure for disturbance differences (frequency or intensity/size) between western and eastern Amazon, according to Espirito-Santo et al 2014?
Lines 300-307:  The authors reported in the results a variation in u-wind speed of close to 0 to ~3 m/s. What is the relevance of 3 m/s wind speeds for tree fall? How the wind speed gradient reported here relates with windstorms as described in Negron-Juarez et al 2017? This is an important point to address since wind speed was an important variable to predict giant trees occurrence.
Lines 314-326: How the variation of these physiological, phenological or morphological traits help to explain the relationship between maximum tree height and the number of cloud-free days (or correlated environmental variables)?
Lines 332-335: This needs to be focused on the results of the present study. I see no direct relationship of shifts in canopy chemical traits and maximum tree height variation in the regional scale. Be concise and make the links more clear to the reader.
Line 341: Soil water content was one of the worse predictors of maximum tree height. Is this a result of a poor soil water characterization?